---
layout: post
title:  "Running NASM inside C inside GDB. Part 1. Integers"
date:   2016-12-07
tags: ["nasm", "c", "gdb"]
---

Recently I was helping someone really junior to write and run simple `C` and `NASM` programm. 

I had some difficulties, as the last time I used Assembly to write something was around 16 years ago. Time to refresh the memory.

Tools required: `nasm`, `gcc`, `gdb` (`lldb` for Mac)


# Numeric calculations

Let's create a simple `C` wrapper program that will invoke external function, written with NASM:

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdbool.h>
#include <inttypes.h>

extern uint64_t asm_compute(uint64_t n1, uint64_t n2, uint64_t n3);

int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  if (argc < 4) {
    printf("Not enough arguments.\nUsage: %s [n1] [n2] [n3]\n", argv[0]);
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
  }

  int64_t n1 = strtoull(argv[1], NULL, 10);
  int64_t n2 = strtoull(argv[2], NULL, 10);
  int64_t n3 = strtoull(argv[3], NULL, 10);

  int64_t result = asm_compute(n1, n2, n3);
  printf("asm_compute(%lld, %lld, %lld) = %lld\n", n1, n2, n3, result);

  return EXIT_SUCCESS;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Here we have defined an external function `asm_compute` that will accept 3 numeric arguments.

Now we have to create a simple Assembly file in NASM to provide this `asm_compute` function.

{% highlight nasm %}
global _asm_compute

section .text

_asm_compute:
    ; do nothing yet
  ret
{% endhighlight %}

Here we defined a global function that we will export, so our C-wrapper will link properly.
Beware of the *underscore* before the function name `_asm_compute`. As described in this [comment](http://stackoverflow.com/a/1035937/1004145) on Stackoverflow, this behavior can be changed, but it is a good thing to follow conventions ;)

[Nasm documentation](http://www.nasm.us/doc/nasmdoc9.html) states following:
> Most 32-bit C compilers share the convention used by 16-bit compilers, that the names of all global symbols (functions or data) they define are formed by prefixing an underscore to the name as it appears in the C program. However, not all of them do: the ELF specification states that C symbols do not have a leading underscore on their assembly-language names.


## Calling Conventions
Before we will dive into writing ASM code, let's have a look at the [Calling Conventions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions)

This is important to understand, in order to make external calls possible. _Caller_ and _Callee_ should respect the same calling convention, in order to send arguments and receive return values.

We will use for our example **x86-64 calling convention**. Please note, that different platforms will implement this differently. For example, *nix will send integer arguments via `RDI`, `RSI`, `RDX`, `RCX` and so on, while Windows will use `RCX`, `RDX`, `R8`, `R9`, and so on.


So in our case, the parameters would be passed through those three: `RDI`: `n1`, `RSI`: `n2`, `RDX`: `n3`

{% highlight nasm %}
_asm_compute:
    ; RDI is the 1st param
    ; RSI is the 2nd param
    ; RDX is the 3rd param
{% endhighlight %}

One other trick to understand how parameters were passed, is to disassemble `C` code with `gcc -S`, which will produce `file.s` assembly, which format is not NASM, btw (so the operands are in reverse order!)

`gcc -S num_calc.asm` produces `num_calc.s`:

{% highlight nasm %}
... ; important part:
    movq    -24(%rbp), %rdi       ; 1st param is copied to rdi
    movq    -32(%rbp), %rsi       ; 2nd param is copied to rsi
    movq    -40(%rbp), %rdx       ; 3rd param is copied to rdx
    callq   _asm_compute          ; call is being made
    movq    %rax, -48(%rbp)       ; return value is grabbed from rax  
...
{% endhighlight %}

Ok, so now we are pretty sure that the values go where expected, and the result is taken from `RAX` register. Our codes should look like this:

{% highlight nasm %}
_asm_compute:
    ...
    mov RAX, 42 ; precisely calculated value, returned to the caller
    ret
{% endhighlight %}


## Back to calculations

Let's do some _useful_ calculations here, like `(n1 * 8 + n2 / 4) * (n3 - 5)`

We have here all basic operations: `*`, `/`, `+`, `-`.
There's plenty documentation online, you can also check those cheat sheets: [1](http://www.jegerlehner.ch/intel/IntelCodeTable.pdf), [2](https://scadahacker.com/library/Documents/Cheat_Sheets/Programming%20-%20x86%20Instructions%201.pdf), [3](https://cs.brown.edu/courses/cs033/docs/guides/x64_cheatsheet.pdf).

One should always remember two things: *size* of the operand (8/16/32/64/.. bits) and if it is *signed* or *unsigned*. Proper Asm command should be used, in order to avoid unpredicted numbers.

Let's break down our formula into easy calculations:

{% highlight nasm %}
    ; n1 * 8        ; 8 = 2^3
    shl RDI, 3      ; really easy when you have degree of '2', 
                    ; just shift left to multiply by degree of 2, or shift right to divide
                    ; for signed ints, SAR/SAL should be used instead, to preserve sign bit
    ; normal way:
    mov rax, rdi
    mov rcx, 8 
    mul rcx         ; Careful! size matters, using cl/cx/eax/rcx will produce unexpected values, 
                    ; as multiplications would be done to a subset of RAX bits (al/ax/eax/rax);
                    ; Again, for signed ints there is IMUL
                    ; result is in rax (rdx:rax)

    shr RSI, 2      ; n2 / 4 ; same binary shift trick  4 = 2^2
    ; normal way
    mov rax, rsi
    xor rdx, rdx    ; cleanup rdx, as div will give EAX:= EDX:EAX / ECX
    mov rcx, 8
    div rcx         ; result is in rax

    ; n3 - 5
    ; by the time we get to our 3rd parameter, which was in RDX, we have already lost its value by doing mul/div
    ; so it would have made sense to save it in the beginning, by moving to the unused registers, or stack
    ; push RDX
    pop RDX         ; load back our rdx value
    sub RDX, 3
{% endhighlight %}

Ok, let's just collect everything into one piece of code:

{% highlight nasm %}
; RDI - n1
; RSI - n2
; RDX - n3
_asm_compute:

  sub rdx, 5    ; calculate 2nd part

  shl rdi, 3    ; multiply by 2^3 : rdi = n1 * 8
  shr rsi, 2    ; divide by 2     : rsi = n2 / 4

  add rdi, rsi  ; rdi = n1*8 + n2/4

  mov rax, rdx  ; rax = n3 - 5
  mul rdi       ; rax = (n3 - 5) * (n1*8 + n2/4)

  ;result is already in rax
  ret

{% endhighlight %}

## Compile

Time to compile everything back into one lovely executable:

{% highlight bash %}
nasm -f macho64 num_calc.asm            # will produce num_calc.o
gcc -Wall -o num_calc num_calc.c num_calc.o   # will compile num_calc.c and link compiled asm code
{% endhighlight %}

If we were lucky enough, everything should be compiled into `num_calc` executable, let's run it:
{% highlight bash %}
$ ./num_calc 20 3 10
asm_compute(20, 3, 10) = 800
{% endhighlight %}

Awesome, it runs. Just let's remember that we used Integers, so we are only talking so far about whole numbers. No floating point calculations.


Continue reading here: [Running NASM inside C inside GDB. Part 2. More arguments]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _posts/2016-12-08-nasm-c-stack.md %})

---
Source code on github: [nasm-c-gdb](https://github.com/lotas/nasm-c-gdb)

